Welcome my friend to today's
lecture on national parks.
We are about to make the
complicated, ridiculously clear on
this concept with this tutorial.
So what are these national parks?
They are areas designated by the
government for the protection
and conservation of wildlife.
Flora and natural habitats.
They are established under the
Wildlife Protection Act 1972, with
the primary objective of preserving
biodiversity, ecological processes
and specific endangered species.
Human activities like grazing,
forestry and cultivation are strictly
prohibited within these parks to ensure
minimal disturbance to the ecosystem.
They play a truly crucial and
irreplaceable role in maintaining
ecological balance and serving as
gene pools for various species.
Real world relevance.
These sparks are vital for maintaining
ecological balance and protecting our
endangered species as a professional.
Understanding these areas helps you
appreciate the broader socioeconomic
and environmental context.
They are essential for biodiversity
conservation to safeguard
unique plant and animal species.
They maintain ecological balance
keeping ecosystems healthy.
They boost tourism and
economy by attracting tourists
and generating local jobs.
They aid in climate change
mitigation, acting as carbon sinks.
They provide sites for research and
education and ensure our water security
by protecting vital watersheds.
Breakdown of question types based
on past patterns for the general
awareness section in your exam.
Questions on this topic,
focus on these formats.
A huge 40% are location-based questions.
State ut. For example, in which state
is the GERD National Park located?
About 25% are associated animal
species questions like which
National Park is famous for.
Its one haunt rhinoceros population.
Roughly 15% are year of establishment
declaration questions, and
about 10% each are on rivers.
Mountains, geographical features and
largest, smallest, first, latest,
unique features, formulas, and tricks.
Now for national parks, our formulas
are really just systematic approaches
and tricks are simple memory aids.
The best approach is categorization
by state group parks by state.
For quick recall, use
association with key species.
Link a park with its most famous animal.
Create some fun acronyms and omics to
remember lists, and definitely memorize
the first largest, smallest parks.
Methods of solving.
Answering these questions
requires a systematic approach
to recall and eliminate.
First, understand the question type.
Is it asking about location,
animal, ear, or a feature?
Next, recall associated information.
Based on the question, try
to pull up the relevant fact.
Next, eliminate options.
Use your knowledge to rule
out incorrect answers.
Look for contextual clues in
the name itself and always
prioritize high value information.
Focus on the most frequently asked
facts, shortcuts and smart techniques.
Here are some smart ways to learn.
Try map-based learning.
Use a political map of India
and mark the locations visual
memory is highly effective.
Create flashcards with the park on one
side and its key facts on the other.
Do a little daily revision rather
than trying to cram all at once.
Focus on prominent parks first as they
are more likely to appear in exams, and
of course, take practice quizzes to test
your knowledge and find your weak areas.
Common mistakes and misconceptions.
Let's avoid some common traps.
Don't go confusing national
parks with wildlife sanctuaries
or biosphere reserves.
Parks have much stricter regulations.
A classic error is
misremembering locations.
You must be careful not to
attribute an animal to a park
where it isn't primarily found.
Mixing up animals with parks is common.
Also, don't ignore newly declared
or renamed parks as questions
often include current affairs.
Lastly, don't overlook small
details like rivers or vegetation.
WH framework summary.
Here's a quick summary.
What are they Protected areas
established by the government for
wildlife and habitat conservation.
Why to preserve biodiversity
and maintain ecological balance.
When established under the Wildlife
Protection Act, 1972, were located
across all of India who manages
them, the ministry of environment
and state forest departments, and how
through legal protection and strict
regulations fully worked out examples.
Example, one question.
Which of the following National Parks
is famous for its population of Asiatic?
Lions?
A TBO National Park, B Gear, forest
National Park, C Ka, Ranga National
Park, d Sunderbans National Park.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Solution.
Step one, analyze the question.
The question asks to identify
the park known for Asiatic lions.
This requires knowledge of
specific animal park associations.
Step two, evaluate options.
A Ran Thabo is famous for Tigers B Gear.
Forest National Park in Gujarat is the
only natural habitat for Asiatic Lions.
C Kaziranga is famous for 100.
Rhinoceros d Sunderbans is
famous for Royal Bengal Tigers.
Step three, select the correct
option based on this evaluation gear.
Forest National Park
is the correct answer.
Example two question.
In which Indian State would you find
the HEMS National Park known for?
Its snow leopards.
A
understand the question before
moving to explanation solution.
Step one, the question asks for the
location of Hammes National Park.
Step two, evaluate options.
A he Pradesh has great
Himalaya National Park.
B OT has Jim Corbett.
C Hemi National Park is located in the
union territory of Laak and is renowned
for its snow leopard population.
D Sikkim has KGA National Park.
Step three, select the correct option.
Hemes National Park is located in Laak.
Option C is our clear winner.
Example three.
Question.
Which of the following national
parks was the first national
park established in India?
A per national park.
B. Jim Corbett National Park, c Bandi,
port National Park, d Tanha National Park.
Understand the question before
moving to explanation solution.
Step one, the question asks to identify
the first national Park in India.
This is a historical fact.
Step two, evaluate options.
A per national park is in Kerala C Bandi.
UR is in Karnataka d Kahan
National Park is in Madhi Pradesh
B. Jim Corbett National Park,
originally established as HA.
National Park in 1936
was the first in India.
Step three, select the correct option.
Jim Corbett National Park
holds this distinction.
It's definitely the correct answer.
Thank you.
See you in the next lecture.